TODO: Courier Prime Code, Courier New
TODO: Merriweather

Line length bike shedding: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=23356607

### Default Fonts

The output generated by `litprog` uses some customizable defaults
fonts:

 - `body {font-family: Gelasio,Georgia,serif;}`
 - `code {font-family: "Iosevka Term SS05",monospace;}`

Documents generated by `litprog` look readable, even beautiful
both on the web and on print. Tinos is chosen because it is a
readable serif font, with a metric compatible fallback font
"Times New Roman" which is widely installed. This choise
minimizes the jarring reflow of a html after the font has
finished loading. While Monoid is not widely installed, it is a
good choice in particular because of the uniqueness of each
individual character. A great deal of confusion in programming
can be avoided if each character in a source code text can be
clearely distinguished from other characters and even be
unambigously identified as a certain character by itself. In
particular the zero character `"0"` should have a strike through,
to distinguish it from an upper case `"O"`; the upper case `"I"`
and lower case `"l"` should have serifs, the digit `"1"` and the
pipe character `"|"` should not. These are the most important
considerations


### Typography Defaults

The perhaps most noteworthy choice in output generated by `litprog` is the
use of *justified and hyphenated body text*. This may be just a matter of
taste, but one could argue that typographers are correct to regard a block
of text with ragged edges on the right to be ugly.

Dsylexia does not just affect some people, it can affect everybody if the
text suffers from bad typesetting. The most important metric here is the
ratio of line length to line height. A line height of 1.5em allows the
eyes of a reader to scan across a line and stay on track. As the line gets
longer, the more line height would is required to ensure that the eye can
find the next line as it moves back across the page. The better choice
however is to limit the length of the line.

 - Minimum of 50 characters per line
 - Maximum of 85 characters per line
 - Minimum line height 1.4em
 - Maximum line height 1.8em

On an A4 and Letter page, a single column layout would require
quite a large font size even on an 85 character long line, so the
default is to use a two column layout.

On an A5
page or booklet, a two column layout would with increased line
length is preferrable.

Code blocks are read differently than a flowing block of text.
They have line lengths determined by the program structure, they
are scanned up and down along their indentation and back and
forth from declaractions and assignments of symbols to their
usages. In other words, unlike with normal body test, the eye does not reggularly have to cross back from the right to the left of the page and find the start of the next line, so a smaller line height is permissible.

 - Maximum of 80 characters per line in code blocks
 - Minimum line height 1.2em
 - Maximum line height 1.4em

