# Introduction to LitProg

LitProg is a [literate programming][ref_wiki_litprog] which 

 1. Uses [markdown][ref_wiki_markdown] as input.
 2. Is language agnostic[^languages_caveat].
 3. Uses a flexible build system[^make_caveat].
 4. Generates beautiful static HTML and PDF documents.
 5. Is a true Literate Programming tool[^litprog_vs_annotated_src].
 6. Is not a silver bullet.

A literate program is written, first and foremost, to be understood by people and not merely to be valid input for a compiler or interpreter.


## LitProg Example

TODO: most bare bones explanation of what LitProg does and examples
LitProg parses markdown files, extracts program code from fenced code blocks, weaves together a program, validates that program,   HTML,  and 

## The Promise of LitProg

Readers of HTML/PDF documents generated by LitProg should be convinced that

 1. The document is the whole program.
 2. The document only exists, because it is internally consistent.
 
TODO: better wording. It's really only as consistent as it declares itself to be. 

## Glossary

- [Input] Source Files: Markdown based inputs
- [Output] Code Files: An artifact generated from fenced code blocks
- [Output] Documents: HTML or PDF files



`litprog` parses markdown and generates outputs in these
formats:

 1. `src`: Source code files, from code blocks
 2. `doc`: Static HTML files
 3. `pdf`: PDF files (in A4, Letter, Booklet)

It supports the following markdown extensions

 - Footnotes
 - Paragraph with CSS class or HTML node type (admonitions, aside)
 - Diagrams using aafigure
 - Tables
 - Syntax Highlighting using pygments
 - Hyperlinked Source Code (where possible)
 - Math support somehow using MathJax

[ref_wiki_litprog]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Literate_programming

[ref_wiki_markdown]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markdown

[^make_caveat]: No, LitProg is not a replacement for make. I'm well aware of make and honestly I love it to bits. However, since output generated earlier phases of a LitProg build can be used by later phases (for example test results can be shown in output documents), it makes sense to have an integrated build system.

[^languages_caveat]: Any language as long as it uses text based files (i.e. it won't work with [scratch](https://scratch.mit.edu/).

[^litprog_vs_annotated_src]: Many existing markdown based literate programming tools are simply annotation tools for source code, often mapping 1:1 from a markdown file to compiled file with source code. This is fine as far as it goes, but it leaves much less freedom to form a narrative that makes most sens for a reader.
